JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Tensions mount over
North Korea's missile
test, as questions
on dealing with the nuclear
threat follow President
Trump on his trip to Europe.
Then: While Republicans work
to salvage their health care
reform bill, we talk with the
governor of New Hampshire about
what the plan could mean for
the nation's opioid epidemic.
And singing the blues together.
Two musical greats join forces
for a new album and tour that's
bringing joy to the blues.
TAJ MAHAL, Musician: Our job
as musicians is to help them
get loose and have a good
time and feel good
about themselves.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: From North
Korea today, new defiance.
The communist regime's leader,
Kim Jong-un, insisted that
he will never negotiate away
his missile and
nuclear programs.
But the world's highest
diplomatic body held
an emergency session
on how to get the North
to do just that.
Correspondent Nick Schifrin
begins our coverage.
NICK SCHIFRIN: This afternoon
in the U.N. Security Council,
the U.S. tried to rally
the world to punish and
isolate North Korea.
NIKKI HALEY, U.S. Ambassador
to the United Nations: It is a
dark day, because yesterday's
actions by North Korea made the
world a more dangerous place.
NICK SCHIFRIN: U.S. Ambassador
Nikki Haley said North Korea's
test of an intercontinental
ballistic missile requires
a global response.
NIKKI HALEY: They have
not had any care for
Russia or China in this.
They have not listened to
anything that you have said.
They're not going to listen
to anything that you say.
And so it's time that we all
stand together and say, we will
not put up with this action.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Haley is trying
to lead a diplomatic effort to
change North Korean behavior.
The U.S. needs Chinese and
Russian help, but Beijing and
Moscow have their own strategy.
VLADIMIR SAFRONKOV, Deputy
Russian Ambassador to the United
Nations (through translator):
We call for all interested
states to act with restraint,
rather than provocation
and war-mongering.
LIU JIEYI, Chinese Ambassador
to the United Nations (through
translator): We call on all
the concerned parties
to exercise restraint,
avoid provocative
actions and belligerent
rhetoric, and demonstrate the
will for unconditional dialogue.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Tuesday's
missile launch crossed
the intercontinental
threshold the U.S. had
been hoping to prevent.
In science terms, the missile
advance was an incremental,
but U.S. officials tell the
"NewsHour" it was in a new,
previously unseen configuration.
It was fired from a mobile
launcher, had a reentry vehicle,
and was two-stage, as seen
on North Korean TV.
The immediate American
response was its own launch.
The U.S. and South
Korean militaries fired
tactical missiles today
that can be rapidly
deployed.
And South Korea released a
video of what an attack on North
Korea would look like, blowing
up North Korean missiles, and
video game graphics of a South
Korean jet bombing Pyongyang.
But, as of now, the focus is
very much on diplomacy and
increasing pressure on North
Korea.
Secretary of State Rex Tillerson
released a statement hours
after the missile launch,
saying any country that helps
North Korea is aiding and
abetting a dangerous regime,
and that all countries that
all countries must show North
Korea there are consequences
to their pursuit
of nuclear weapons.
In a tweet this morning,
President Trump expressed
frustration that China
hasn't done more, writing:
"So much for China
working with us.
But we had to give it a try."
So, the administration
is casting a wide net.
Today, Mr. Trump talked with
Egyptian President Abdel
Fattah El-Sisi by phone.
North Korea sells missile
technology and receives
remittances from Africa
to Southeast Asia.
To try and stop that income,
today, the U.S. delivered a
threat to China and others.
NIKKI HALEY: There are countries
that are allowing, even
encouraging, trade with North
Korea, in violation of U.N.
Security Council resolutions.
Such countries would
also like to continue
their trade arrangements
with the United States.
That's not going to happen.
NICK SCHIFRIN: The U.S. military
in South Korea says it is being
-- quote -- "self-restrained."
That policy will remain until
the diplomacy plays out.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Nick Schifrin.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We will take a
detailed look at the question
of sanctions and North Korea
right after the news summary.
In the day's other news:
The city of Hamburg,
Germany, braced for mass
demonstrations, involving
up to 100,000 people,
at this weekend's summit
of the leaders of 20 top
industrialized nations.
Last night, police used water
cannons to disperse crowds.
Today saw hundreds of
people dressed as zombies
staging a peaceful march.
Tomorrow, activists plan what
they call a Welcome to Hell
March to greet President Trump
and the leaders of
Russia, China and Turkey.
Mr. Trump arrived in Warsaw,
Poland, this evening to
begin his European trip.
Tomorrow, he will hold talks
with his Polish counterpart,
before delivering a speech in
Warsaw Square.
Poland hosts several
thousand U.S. troops as
part of its NATO defenses.
An American soldier has
been killed in Afghanistan.
The Pentagon says Private 1st
Class Hansen Kirkpatrick of
Wasilla, Alaska, died in a
mortar attack on Monday.
It happened in Helmand
Province in the south.
Two other soldiers were wounded.
Seven U.S. troops have been
killed in Afghanistan this year.
In Syria, artillery and
airstrikes pounded away
today at Raqqa, the
Islamic State's self-styled
capital.
Kurdish-led militia fighters
backed by U.S. coalition planes
are steadily advancing into
the city.
John Ray of Independent
Television News is there,
and filed this report.
JOHN RAY: Into the
city of Jihadi John and
countless barbarities,
a road stretching back
to terror in London,
Manchester, and beyond.
It lies in ruins now.
We pass the body of an
ISIS fighter, his caliphate
decomposing with him.
Beyond the sand barrier is the
wall of ancient Medina that
has now fallen to the Kurds.
We have obtained exclusive
pictures from a drone above
this urban battlefield.
They show the devastating
power of the West's
warplanes and missiles.
The so-called Islamic State
is being wiped off the map.
The route to the front line
involves a sprint across sniper
alley, and careful steps over
rubble that often
conceals mines.
We are close enough
to hear ISIS radio.
"Now is time for jihad,"
a commander urges his
beleaguered forces.
The Kurds are claiming
this is a great victory.
They have taken the Old City
walls after a months-long
blood-soaked slog through the
streets of Raqqa.
But ahead of them now,
heavily armed ISIS
fighters, booby-trapped
buildings and suicide
bombers.
These soldiers took up arms
against ISIS from the start.
They believe they are
moving in for the kill.
RASHO, Kurdish Fighter: I want
a free Raqqa for my family,
for everyone in here, for every
family in Syria.
JOHN RAY: Is ISIS
finished in Raqqa now?
RASHO: Yes.
It's finished.
JOHN RAY: Inside the Old
City, perhaps 100,000
civilians are trapped,
caught between airstrikes
and 4,000 ISIS fighters.
Those who can't escape run.
Home is this makeshift
camp in the desert.
"We have left hell
behind," they tell us.
But in one corner, separated
from the rest, the brides
and children of is.
Their husbands or fathers
are dead or in jail.
Here, ISIS might measure its
future in weeks or months,
but its days are numbered.
JUDY WOODRUFF: That was John Ray
of Independent Television News.
A gunfight between two armed
gangs in Northern Mexico left
at least 14 people dead early
today.
It happened in Chihuahua State,
when members of rival drug
cartels got into a shoot-out.
Drug violence has pushed
homicides in Mexico to their
highest point in 20 years.
Pro-government militias in
Venezuela attacked opposition
lawmakers today with sticks and
metal bars.
They stormed into the
congress, in plain sight
of security forces.
Four lawmakers were injured,
and at least one had to
be taken to a hospital.
It was the latest incident
in Venezuela's growing
political violence.
The killing of a police
officer in New York City drew
widespread condemnation today.
An ex-convict who ranted about
police online shot Miosotis
Familia at close range in her
mobile command post in
the Bronx last night.
He was killed moments
later by other officers.
In a statement today, U.S.
Attorney General Jeff Sessions
cited a string of attacks on
police in recent years.
He said -- quote -- "These
killings must stop."
In economic news, the
European Union and Japan
reached an agreement in
principle on a far-reaching
free trade deal.
Their leaders plan to endorse
it at a summit tomorrow.
And on Wall Street, the Dow
Jones industrial average lost
a point to close at 21478.
The Nasdaq rose 40 points,
and the S&P 500 added three.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
could new economic sanctions
stall North Korea's nuclear
program?; a change of mind --
a new poll suggests the British
now want to stay in the European
Union; New Hampshire's governor
on how the Republican health
care bill could affect his
state's opioid epidemic that
is raging; and much more.
There are no easy answers, and
few good options, when it comes
to dealing now with North Korea.
We look at whether new economic
sanctions like those being
considered at the United
Nations could change
the trajectory of
the country's nuclear
ambitions with David Cohen,
who served as undersecretary
for terrorism and financial
intelligence at the Treasury
Department during the
Obama administration.
He also served as the
deputy director of the
Central Intelligence
Agency from 2015 to 2017.
And John Mearsheimer, a
West Point graduate and
former Air Force officer,
he writes extensively
on strategic issues and is a
political science professor
at the University of Chicago.
He also works with the U.S.
intelligence community.
And we welcome both of
you to the "NewsHour."
I want to start with
you, David Cohen.
We heard in Nick Schifrin's
report Ambassador Nikki
Haley referring to
countries doing business
with North Korea in
violation of U.N. sanctions.
What is the picture?
Give us a picture of the
financial and business
dealings other countries
do right now with
the North.
DAVID COHEN, Former U.S.
Undersecretary for Terrorism and
Financial Intelligence: Well,
most of it is illicit, with
the exception of the trade
with China, and that tends to
be in coal, in minerals
and very few other items.
There are other countries
around the world, in Africa in
particular, in the Gulf, where
you have North Korean laborers
working and where you have
North Korea selling weapons
to these countries.
That is in violation of U.N.
Security Council resolutions and
in violations of the sanctions.
And those transactions
tend to flow through
financial institutions
in China in a way that
is intended to be disguised
from the international
community, because they
are illicit transactions.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, you have
written that new sanctions could
be written, could be enacted
in a way that would put
real pressure on the North.
What would those look like?
DAVID COHEN: Well, what they
would look like are sanctions
principally focused on Chinese
front companies and Chinese
institutions that are
facilitating this illicit trade.
If you look at the way
that North Korea engages
with the world today,
there are a few nodes,
20, 40, 100 nodes, but it's a
limited sets of these companies
and these financial institutions
in China where the bulk of
the financial activity occurs.
We could focus on those nodes,
squeeze those nodes, and as a
result of that, squeeze North
Korea.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, John
Mearsheimer, you have
taken a look at this.
Do you think that could work?
JOHN MEARSHEIMER, University
of Chicago: No, I don't think
sanctions will work, Judy, and
I think there are
two reasons for that.
One is that North Korea
is not going to give
up its nuclear weapons.
Indeed, it would be crazy to
give up its nuclear weapons.
The United States is interested
in regime change, and nuclear
weapons are the ultimate
deterrent.
So, you would have to inflict
enormous pain on North Korea
to get it to give up those
nuclear weapons.
I mean, you would really
have to put tremendous
economic pressure on them.
And you cannot do that, in
large part because the Chinese
will not allow you to do it.
For China, North Korea is
a vital strategic asset.
For China, it's imperative
that the North Korean regime
remain in place and that the
regime not be toppled.
Therefore, if we try to put
really significant pressure,
economic pressure, on Pyongyang,
the Chinese will just move in
and counter it and make sure
that the North Korean regime
survives.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Let me...
JOHN MEARSHEIMER: And, again,
that regime is determined
to keep its nuclear weapons.
JUDY WOODRUFF: David
Cohen, what about that?
DAVID COHEN: Well, John's right
that the North Korean regime
looks at the nuclear weapons
programs as the guarantor
of regime survival.
But there is the possibility
that there is a wedge that can
be driven between the nuclear
weapons program and
Kim Jong-un's desire
to stay in power.
And the way to drive that
wedge is by putting coercive,
diplomatic and economic pressure
on the regime in North Korea.
We will need China to
make this effective.
We cannot do it over
China's objections.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But his
point is China won't do it.
DAVID COHEN: Well, I
think we have not fully
tested that proposition.
And one of the purposes served
by the sanctions that were done
last week and the sanctions
that we can do is to encourage
China to take this more
seriously and to work with us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: John
Mearsheimer, why can't that
be -- why can't that happen?
JOHN MEARSHEIMER: Well, let
me respond to David's point.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Sure.
JOHN MEARSHEIMER: What President
Trump wanted to do was, he
wanted to get the Chinese to
put significant pressure on
North Korea to stop these
nuclear tests and to reach some
sort of modus vivendi
with the United States.
But the Chinese
could not do that.
And the reason the Chinese
could not do that and the reason
they won't be able to implement
David's suggested policy
is because the Chinese
have remarkably little
leverage over North
Korea.
And the North Koreans
fully understand that.
And the North Koreans don't
play along with the Chinese
when they put pressure on them,
because the North Koreans fully
understand that the Chinese
need North Korea to survive.
And once the North Koreans
understand that, it gives them
significant room to basically
poke the Chinese in the eye.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, David Cohen,
what about his point that North
Korea -- that China really
does have limited leverage,
not as much as I think some
people have been thinking?
DAVID COHEN: They actually have
quite a lot of leverage, in
both the illicit and the illicit
- - sorry -- the licit and
the illicit financial activity
that goes in North Korea.
They can squeeze North
Korea on the coal sales.
Korea on their illicit
financial activity.
They will do it to an
extent that doesn't
cause a destabilizing
situation in North Korea,
but they can do it in a way
that can make North Korea
more interested in a potential
negotiation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So you're
talking about threading a
needle here, John Mearsheimer.
It sounds like we're talking
about something in between doing
nothing and doing a lot more.
JOHN MEARSHEIMER: Well, you
can do a little bit more, but
the point is to make the North
Koreans give up their nuclear
weapons, you have to put a
great deal of pain, a great
deal of punishment on them.
And the Chinese are not going
to play that game, because the
Chinese are heavily dependent
on maintaining a
sovereign North Korea.
And the last thing they want
to do is see the West bring
North Korea to its knees, and
then see North Korea crumble,
and run the risk of South
Korea incorporating North Korea
into a greater Korea.
This would be a strategic
disaster for the Chinese.
And this is why we have so
little leverage over North
Korea when we try to go through
the Chinese.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What about that?
DAVID COHEN: Well, I think
that John and I agree that it
would require an extraordinary
amount of pressure to bring
the North Koreans to the table.
My point is that
we ought to try.
The alternative is to sort of
accept a North Korea with a
nuclear weapon, with an ICBM.
There is the potential
that we can use pressure
working with the Chinese
to thread that needle
to bring the North Koreans
to the table and to find
a way to denuclearize
the Korean Peninsula,
which the Chinese have been very
clear about for many years is
also their policy preference,
is a denuclearized
Korean Peninsula.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And to bring --
perhaps this would bring them
to the table to talk in that
way.
DAVID COHEN: Correct.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All right,
we're not going to resolve...
(CROSSTALK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Go ahead.
I think what we agree -- John
Mearsheimer, quick comment?
JOHN MEARSHEIMER: Yes,
just very quickly.
Let's assume that David's
right, and we can put tremendous
pressure on the North Koreans.
Do we really want to do that?
Do we want to back a
nuclear-armed state run by
Kim Jong-un into a corner?
Isn't that the most likely
scenario where they might use
nuclear weapons, when they're
desperate?
DAVID COHEN: Well, I think
the most likely scenario is if
we threaten them militarily.
And I think it's very
important we exercise restraint
militarily in the short-term.
I think this is a long-term
plan that needs to be
implemented smartly, but
it can be accomplished.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I think what
everybody agrees is, there
is a lot at stake here.
David Cohen, John
Mearsheimer, thank you both.
JOHN MEARSHEIMER:
You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In what
was perhaps the most
consequential decision
in Britain this century,
voters are now having second
thoughts about their choice
to leave the European Union.
A new opinion poll shows
a majority of British
people now want to stay,
and business leaders
are warning their once
flourishing economy
will flounder unless
the right compromise
is reached with the E.U.
during exit negotiations.
Add to that a deeply
divided government after
the recent election has
left a hung Parliament,
and it has become harder for
many to keep calm and carry on.
Special correspondent
Malcolm Brabant reports.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Aldeburgh
in Eastern England,
this is Brexit beach.
The town's centuries'
old fishing tradition
is on its deathbed.
In common with kindred coastal
communities around the country,
fishermen voted to leave
the European Union.
They believe excessive
regulation from Brussels
is killing their industry.
One year after Britain's
so-called independence
day, Mark Foreman is
worried that the country's
commitment to
Brexit is wavering.
MARK FOREMAN, Fisherman:
I thought that would
improve the fishing
situation, but now I have
got my doubts.
I would have still come out
anyway for anything else.
I want the country to be run by
British people, not by the E.U.
I think there's too many
people who are in power who
are against Brexit, and I think
there are so many people
with money tied up in Europe.
They just don't
want to come out.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The government
has promised to revitalize the
fishing industry post-Brexit,
but, in the current climate,
Kirk Stripling fears betrayal.
KIRK STRIPLING, Fisherman:
I'm really afraid that we
will be sold down the river.
They will do a deal
over something else and
sacrifice us fishermen.
We're in a ludicrous situation,
where we only catch what is in
season at the time and which
is on our doorstep.
And quite often, we can have
loads of the fish in the sea
right here and we have got
no quota to catch it.
So we sit here and starve to
death, while the fish swim by.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Polar opposite
views about Europe prevail
80 miles away in Cambridge,
a historic seat of
learning and innovation.
This is Britain's
Silicon Valley, whose
ethos is that science is
collaborative and requires
an international,
frontier-free mentality.
But campus director
Professor Michael Wakelam
fears its cutting-edge
biotech research and
development could be jeopardized
by what some perceive as the
xenophobic nature of Brexit.
MICHAEL WAKELAM, Professor: We
will have a reduced access to
the talent pool within Europe.
And, secondly, what Brexit
says about our approach as a
country is that people no longer
want to work with us.
There is a perception
that Britain is no longer
a welcoming place for
talented people to come.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Cambridge-based
entrepreneur David Cleevely
specializes in turning great
ideas into profitable
businesses.
A self-proclaimed angel
investor, he disputes
the Brexit mantra that
leaving the E.U. would
enable British companies
to exploit untapped markets
in the rest of the world.
DAVID CLEEVELY, Entrepreneur:
We do business in some of the
most difficult countries, in
Pakistan, or in Nigeria
or other countries, for
example, in South America.
And the amount of extra margin
there is there for increasing
those exports is, quite frankly,
limited.
My concern about Brexit is
that we have a big market just
a few miles away, and we're
not going to be able to access
it as freely as we could before.
MALCOLM BRABANT: According
to a new opinion poll, the
result of the Brexit referendum
would be reversed if
it was held today.
The survey showed that a clear
majority, 54 percent, would vote
to remain within the European
Union, and 46 percent
would decide to leave.
It's quite clear that many
Britons regret the decision
they made last year, and perhaps
wish that the Brexit
mechanism could be reversed.
According to experts, that's
technically possible, but
it's unlikely to happen.
At Trinity College,
professor Catherine
Barnard believes the recent
election, which left Britain
with a minority government,
has further undermined
its hand during protracted
talks to withdraw
from Europe.
CATHERINE BARNARD, Trinity
College: In reality, the U.K.
is in a somewhat weak bargaining
position.
The famous phrase is to have
your cake and eat it, that
it would be possible both to
leave the European
Union, but have the
best bits of membership.
And it's always been clear that
the E.U. wasn't going to allow
this, because why would they?
It's not in the E.U.'s
interests for a country
to do what the U.K. did.
And so it's in the E.U.'s
interests, as Chancellor
Merkel has said, is
to look after the E.U.
27, which means being
tough on the U.K.
MALCOLM BRABANT: This monument
commemorates the Great Fire
of London, which wiped out
much of England's
capital in 1666.
Many economists fear that Brexit
will have a similar impact on
the city of London, Europe's
biggest financial
services center.
The Japanese bank Nomura has
said it will move some of its
operations to Germany after
Brexit.
Others may join the exodus.
This week, a city of
London delegation is
heading to Brussels to
appeal for a free trade
deal to preserve a sector
that generates 12 percent
of Britain's income.
Jens Torpe is the Danish
publisher of a daily
business newspaper.
JENS TORPE, Newspaper
Publisher: I think,
inevitably, that a number
of bankers and institutions
would have to move
over to the continent.
It's about half-a-million
people working here.
I think you would see at
least some 50,000 moving out.
So, I think it's going
to have quite dramatic
implications for the city.
The latest growth figures
for Britain put us down
on the same par as Italy.
We used to be number one in
the E.U., so everybody agrees
that there is a crisis coming.
MALCOLM BRABANT: London's
cosmopolitan Borough
Market is flourishing
again after last month's
Islamist terror attack in which
eight people were murdered.
Some traders favor a so-called
soft Brexit, which would permit
the continued free movement
of goods and people
from the continent.
A hard Brexit would mean the
reimposition of import tariffs
and restrict the migration
of E.U. citizens.
Marianna Kolookotroni from
southern Greece has been running
this stall for seven years.
MARIANNA KOLOOKOTRONI,
Vendor: It is a little
bit scary, I have to say.
But I am trying to remain
positive, and I really hope
that nothing is going to change,
because it's not in the
interests of anyone, really.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Thea Wunder
is from Italy's border with
Austria, and she fears customs
duty resulting from a
hard Brexit would compound
price increases on her
meat products, caused
by the British currency dropping
in value after the referendum.
THEA WUNDER, Vendor: So the
exchange rate, it has already
affected it, so the euro has
much more value
than it used to be.
So, I already -- the business
already loses money on that.
And there's only so much we
can put our prices up to be
still fair and competitive.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Britain's
tourism and hospitality
industry generates 10
percent of the nation's
income.
It relies heavily on foreign
workers; 25 percent of the three
million people in this field
comes from the European Union.
The duty manager Bashir Issa
is originally from Somalia.
BASHIR ISSA, Duty Manager:
British people are not working
in the industry, and we need
to have the European community
or anywhere else in the
world coming to us with their
expertise, helping us
and the industry to grow.
MALCOLM BRABANT: The
industry wants to preserve
freedom of movement, and
is lobbying the government
hard.
Spokesman Vernon Hunte:
VERNON HUNTE, Hospitality
Industry Spokesman: We
believe that the economy
must be put first,
that the British industry,
especially, of course, from
our perspective, hospitality
businesses, their needs and
requirements are put first.
NICK WARD, Britain: Independent
doesn't mean isolated.
It's an interactive
independence.
Where do people get this idea
that, when you're independent,
you're closing your doors?
They're mad.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Nick
Ward relishes the
freedom of motorcycling.
Independence and national
sovereignty drive his
continued support for Brexit.
NICK WARD: There's more
to it than economics.
What Brexit actually means is
that you want to control your
own borders and you want to
make your own laws.
And that is your starting
point for negotiations.
Why do so many people want to
come here in the first place?
Britain is probably the
least racist or xenophobic
country in all of Europe.
Try being black and
playing football in Poland.
We want to interact and
we want to maintain this
beautiful island for
everybody and generations
to come.
MALCOLM BRABANT: British
attitudes towards
Europe are turning, as
people belatedly agree
with the so-called remainers
that pre-referendum,
pro-Brexit rhetoric was flawed.
Business leaders hope
the prospect of economic
trouble will convince the
government to compromise
with Brussels.
On Brexit beach, Britain's
schisms are as deep as ever.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Malcolm Brabant in Aldeburgh.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
the toll insecticides
are having on bees; two
renowned blues musicians
team up on a new album; and
what it's like to be the
first Muslim cover girl.
But, first, let's turn to
the Senate Republican bill to
overhaul parts of Obamacare.
The Senate may be in recess
this week, but Majority Leader
Mitch McConnell is working
behind the scenes to craft a
bill that will appeal to enough
Republican votes to pass.
One of the key stumbling blocks,
the provision to cut Medicaid
spending by more than $770
billion over 10 years.
That has sparked serious
concern among many governors,
among other reasons, over what
it could mean for opioid
abuse treatment and
related health needs.
The Medicaid expansion under
the Affordable Care Act
provided new coverage to many.
Reportedly, Senator McConnell
has been considering
a $45 billion fund to
deal with opioid abuse.
New Hampshire is one state
that is dealing with a crisis.
It has the second highest
rate of opioid deaths
relative to its population.
I spoke with the state's
Republican governor, Christopher
Sununu, a short time ago, and
started by asking him why he
doesn't support the current
Republican Senate proposal.
GOV.
CHRIS SUNUNU (R), New Hampshire:
Well, I think it's important
to start off by understanding
that Obamacare has failed,
it is not sustainable,
it is not affordable.
Specifically here in New
Hampshire, the health care
exchange is really on the brink.
We're looking at upwards
of 40 percent cost
increases to individuals.
That's just not
affordable to anyone.
So, I do applaud the Senate
and the House's efforts and the
Trump administration's efforts
to really take Obamacare as
a reform that has to happen.
That being said, what they're
really doing here is, they're
kind of conflating two issues.
They're looking at Medicaid,
traditional Medicaid entitlement
reform, which absolutely has to
be a viable discussion in
Congress, and Obamacare reform.
And they're really
putting the two together.
That's the end result there.
The cost implications, if you
will, are really drastic to
the state of New Hampshire.
You're looking at over
$1.5 billion at best
over the next 10 years.
That's not just a challenge
for us in the state.
It's not practical.
It's just not practical at all.
We have no sales tax,
we have no income tax.
We don't have the taxes to
raise, nor would we ever want
to, like other states do.
So we have to find a
better solution there.
So I commend them for
taking up the challenge.
But right now, as it sits, the
Senate plan is not a viable
solution for this state.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Governor,
specifically with regard to
the opioid use crisis in your
state of New Hampshire,
what would this bill, this
proposal mean for that?
GOV.
CHRIS SUNUNU: Well, we have been
on kind of ground zero, if you
will, for the opioid crisis.
We have one of the fastest
growing economies, one of
the best qualities of life.
Because we are a small state,
that allows us to be very
innovative in our approach.
And so we have been able to
sustain great success in the
state, in spite of the opioid
crisis.
But part of that, when you
look whether it's Medicaid
expansion or other programs that
have allowed individuals to
get care, recovery services,
medical care that they otherwise
may not have -- would have been
able to receive, that has been
a big boon for our state and
it's been a big boost to those
individuals and allowed those
doors to be opened to them
in ways that otherwise
it wouldn't have.
So, when you look at both
the cost implications,
how Medicaid expansion
right now as it's proposed
to being winnowed down, if
you will, over the next few
years, again, those costs are
real severe and they're again
something that just is not
practical for the state of New
Hampshire.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What would
it mean to the program
that you have in place
now in New Hampshire?
GOV.
CHRIS SUNUNU: Well, when you
look at folks that are coming
through recovery or treatment
or folks that are looking
to fight that addiction,
you have remember
addiction with opioids is
not something that you get
through in a couple of years.
It's a lifelong struggle.
It's a lifelong kind of battle,
if you will, that folks have
to have the programs in place
not just for six months or a
year, but for the long-term.
And we have to have
those recovery programs.
We have to have those
treatment options in place.
With opioid addiction
comes some very severe
medical conditions as
well, whether liver
or heart issues
that come with that.
Right now, we're
able to treat those.
We're able to be preventative
with a lot of those, as opposed
to just allowing the old
way of doing things where
everyone would just pile
into the emergency room.
So, going back, taking instead
of one or two steps back,
but three or four steps back,
all the way to the point where
we're cutting services that,
pre-Obamacare, were in place,
right, we're looking for a
system that, for New Hampshire
at least, is worse than there
were even pre-Obamacare.
So my message to the
Senate is very clear.
Look at Obamacare reform as is.
Look at that program, what
we can do to reform it.
Understand that the opioid
crisis is affecting a lot of
states, not just New Hampshire.
Understand what those
implications might be.
It's not just in the funding,
but it's in the flexibilities
that states have to have.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
GOV.
CHRIS SUNUNU: You have to
have a flexible system.
And being able to do that
will allow us as governors to
implement the programs that much
easier.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now, it's
been reported, as I think you
know, that the Senate majority
leader, Mitch McConnell,
is looking at possibly
adding something like
$45 billion to deal
with opioid abuse around the
country over a period of years.
Would that make a difference?
GOV.
CHRIS SUNUNU: When you look
at $45 billion to deal with
the opioid crisis, absolutely
that's going to
make a difference.
There's no doubt about it.
If it's money going in to kind
of hopefully get votes in the
Senate bill, that's a different
issue.
I'm not going to sign onto that.
But there is no doubt
that more resources
would help this crisis.
It allows recovery centers to
have more longer-term programs,
open up treatment options.
We can break down some
of the permitting process
to get more of those beds
open for individuals,
peer-to-peer recovery services.
We have been able to be very,
very innovative here in New
Hampshire, really on the cutting
edge.
And that's how we have been
able to sustain such a growing
economy, such a high quality
of life, in spite of the crisis.
We don't want to start throwing
a wrench in those gears right
now and slow down the incredible
process we have been able
to make in New Hampshire.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I ask you about
that money because specifically
other governors, I know
John Kasich of Ohio and others
who have an opioid crisis in
their own states, have said
that's just not enough money
to make a difference over
a long number of years.
GOV.
CHRIS SUNUNU: Well, as I said
earlier, you know, this is
something that is not going
to get solved in the
next couple of years.
It is going to be a lifetime
issue for a lot of these folks.
We have to have lifetime-style
programs in place to kind
of ease them not just off of
the opioids they're in,
making sure they have
peer-to-peer support
recovery programs, making
sure they can enter the
work force and hopefully
get on better private
insurance plans, as
opposed to just relying
on expanded Medicaid or
the health care exchange.
So, when you're able to create
systems that work efficiently
-- I'm an engineer by trade.
I'm all about creating
an efficient system.
When you're able to do that
and implement that, there is
a lot of savings you can have
on the back end.
I do believe dollars can help.
There's no doubt about that.
But when you look at the total
implication of this Senate
bill, $1.5 billion at best
over the next 10 years, I don't
mean to sound glib, but $45
billion here and there really
isn't making the dent and really
making the long-term effects
that we have to be addressing
as part of a long-term
Medicaid reform.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Governor, one
other thing, the argument that
the Republicans in Congress
have made on Medicaid and
that is -- and the president's
budget director, Mick Mulvaney,
has said Medicaid is
unsustainable on the path that
it's on now, it's grown way too
expensive, it cannot continue
like this, cuts have to come,
there has to be a change in
the trajectory.
GOV.
CHRIS SUNUNU: Well,
look, I would absolutely
agree with that.
Look, Washington is dealing
-- the Senate and the House
and the president are dealing
with nearly $20
trillion in debt.
That is real money
owed to someone, and
a lot of it oversees.
So, our spending over the
last eight years has gone
completely out of control.
And so they do have
the challenge ahead of
them of reeling that
spending back in, creating
more efficient systems.
Reeling it in is one thing.
Going above and beyond from
even where we were eight
years ago is another story.
And that's where we kind of
draw the line and say, look,
let's deal with Obamacare here,
let's deal with Medicaid
entitlement reform in another
discussion, another discussion
that frankly has to probably
be a longer discussion,
have to really get the
input from the states,
nothing that should be rushed.
So if we can deal with
those two issues separately,
I think we can have just
much better outcomes
and a much more viable
solution for all the states.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Governor Chris
Sununu of New Hampshire, thank
you very much for talking
with us.
GOV.
CHRIS SUNUNU: Thank you, Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Time now for our
weekly segment on science and
technology, the Leading Edge.
And this week, Hari Sreenivasan
is here with an update on a
pair of important stories.
HARI SREENIVASAN: They are
important findings and analyses
on a pair of stories we have
long been covering, the
health of bees and the
impacts of climate change.
A recent study looked at
the economic consequences
of climate change and
concluded it will make
the U.S. poorer and more unequal
if present trends continue.
The South would be
hit the hardest.
A different set of studies
looked at the health of bees in
connection to insecticides used
in crops.
Bees are critical for our
global food production.
Honeybees alone are
responsible for pollinating
$15 billion of U.S. crops.
The new papers demonstrated
the popular insecticide
used in agriculture
called neonicotinoids
can be harmful to bees.
Miles O'Brien is with us again.
Miles, we have been
looking at or scientists
have been thinking
about the chemicals that
are used in insecticides as
kind of one of the number one
culprits for colony collapse
for a long time.
So, what is so new
about these studies?
MILES O'BRIEN: Well,
you're right, Hari.
There have been a lot of studies
in the past looking at bees
and these insecticides, which
are coated on the seeds
and absorbed -- they call
it systemic to the plants.
They have been widely used for
a decade, an alternative to
spraying insecticides on the
plant as they grow.
The concern is that they
can harm pollinators.
But, so far, that's only
been a theory in the lab.
Separate teams in Europe and
Canada tested the possible
link between these neonics and
bee losses in the field
for the first time.
They placed bee colonies close
to crops that had been treated
with the neonicotinoids and
other colonies far
away from agriculture.
They sampled a variety
of specimens, pollen,
nectar, larvae, bees
themselves, of course.
And they say the insecticide
is not only found in the crops
they are meant to protect, but
it spreads to other plants in
the area that are attracted
to bees, and it persists for
months.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, how does
it affect the bees, and what
happens to the whole colony?
MILES O'BRIEN: That's the key
question, connecting those dots.
Researchers at York University
in Ontario did a second test
in the laboratory mimicking
what they found in the field.
And they exposed bees
to a small amount of the
neonicotinoids-infused pollen.
And those bees stopped --
get this -- maintaining
the hygiene of their hive.
Typically, bees will
remove sick or dead bees.
But the insecticide-exposed
bees for some reason stopped
doing this, leaving sick bees
inside the hive.
And the beehive became
a pigsty, if you will.
I caught up with Nadejda
Tsvetkov, one of the
lead authors of the
York University study.
NADEJDA TSVETKOV, York
University: What we
found in our study was
that worker bees from
exposed colonies die 23
percent sooner, so that's a
very big hit to the colony.
They also had abnormal
foraging behaviors.
We found also that the
colonies had difficulty
replacing a queen.
So, over time, we had more and
more queenless colonies, which,
unless there is an intervention,
the colonies will perish.
MILES O'BRIEN: At first blush,
this study seems to put to rest
the neonic collapse debate.
But, in a separate study also
published last week, a European
team found some bee colonies
in Germany that thrived even
though they were close to fields
with neonic-treated crops.
This led researchers to believe
there must be other geographical
or environmental factor
in play.
Maybe some bees are
more susceptible to the
toxins, depending on
their locations, for
example.
In short, the studies suggests
the effects of neonics
on bees are inconsistent.
But that study was funded
in part by the German
chemical and pharmaceutical
giant Bayer, which
happens to be the maker
of neonicotinoids.
Now, in a statement, Bayer
says it remains convinced that
neonicotinoid seed treatments
have no short- or long-term
negative effects on bees, and
that these seed treatments are
useful and effective
tool for farmers.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In the
totally different category of
climate science, there was a big
study this week.
And, usually, when climate
studies come out, we're looking
at environmental impacts.
What was interesting
about this one was, it was
looking at economic impacts.
Tell us a little bit about that.
MILES O'BRIEN: Well, this
one is a very impressive
study on climate change.
Scientists in the climate realm
teamed up with economists,
the dismal science meeting
climate science, if you will.
And they looked at the economic
impacts of climate change as
you project out to the future.
And perhaps the most interesting
finding was that climate change
will hit different socioeconomic
classes differently.
Here's Berkeley scientist
and lead author of the
study Solomon Hsiang.
SOLOMON HSIANG, University of
California, Berkeley: In the
South, where it's hot, and
along the coasts, we
might see populations
losing the equivalent
of 20 percent of their
income, whereas, in the cooler
Northern and Western regions,
we actually see that populations
might benefit a little.
And because the North tends
to be wealthier and the South
tends to be poorer, what we
see is that, in the
future, climate change
is going to increase
economic inequality within
the United States.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, how
does the U.S. fare overall?
MILES O'BRIEN: Well, the team
estimates that for each degree
Fahrenheit increase in global
temperatures, the U.S. economy
overall loses about 0.7 percent
of gross domestic product,
with each degree of
warming costing more than
the last as you go up.
So, the U.S. as a whole is
not a winner economically.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, does
it break down by industry?
Say, for example,
agriculture might be hit
harder or real estate?
MILES O'BRIEN: Well,
agriculture, especially
in the Midwest, will
likely suffer immensely.
That seems obvious.
But it could be comparable to
the Dust Bowl of the 1930s,
according to these researchers.
Of course, real estate
on the coastline, that's
another obvious one.
But here's a surprise.
The team found the biggest
economic impact of climate
change was in health care.
They expect people living
in the South especially
will be hit more with
heat-related complications,
like heatstroke.
Managing that and dealing
with the victims is, of
course, very expensive.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And this
is happening to a population
that's already poorer than the
general average in
the United States.
MILES O'BRIEN: And there
is the vicious cycle.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right.
Miles O'Brien, thanks so much.
MILES O'BRIEN:
You're welcome, Hari.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight:
A pair of blues greats are
collaborating on a new album
and a North American tour.
They have known each other
for decades, but their joint
project has only recently come
to fruition.
Jeffrey Brown has the story.
JEFFREY BROWN: The Chautauqua
Auditorium in Boulder, Colorado
recently, at the start of
a new tour by two musicians
who've been doing this a long
time, but never together.
And while it's called the
blues, 75-year-old Taj Mahal and
65-year-old Keb' Mo' are feeling
nothing but joy.
TAJ MAHAL, Musician: That's
what we like about music.
That's why we do music,
to share the fun.
Life brings a lot of strife.
In the digital age,
it's even more intense.
And a lot of people don't
know how to get loose of it.
So, our job as musicians is to
help them get loose and have a
good time and feel good about
themselves.
JEFFREY BROWN: Born Henry Saint
Clair Fredericks, Taj Mahal is
a living legend in the world
of roots and blues music, a
singer-songwriter who plays
many instruments and draws from
many musical influences.
Kevin Moore, Keb' Mo''s
given name, spent many
years in various R&B,
rock, and pop bands,
until he went out on his own
in the early 1990s and focused
on his first love, the blues,
gaining renown as
a master guitarist,
singer, and songwriter.
KEB' MO', Musician: It was
like a missing piece that
made everything relevant.
So, what I did was, I took all
of those things that I had been
doing before, those experiences,
took the blues and
wrapped it in there.
And what came out was Keb' Mo'.
JEFFREY BROWN: Now, together,
they are TajMo, the name of
their new album, which features
several songs they co-wrote,
including "Don't Leave Me Here."
On "Take a Giant Step," one
of Taj Mahal's earlier songs,
they were joined on stage by
his daughters.
And then there was the more raw
acoustic duet of "Diving Duck
Blues," a song that Taj Mahal
first recorded on his
debut album back in 1968.
I have heard you for a long
time, blues, folk, world
music, I mean, different
kinds of elements, different
kind of influences.
TAJ MAHAL: My grandparents
come from the Caribbean.
I grew up listening to Caribbean
music, as much as I listened
to the Southern gospel.
My dad liked bebop.
We had bebop and jazz, and
jump blues, you know, and
spirituals, and classical music,
opera, everything, you know?
So, it's like it didn't
hurt me because I
heard all those things.
It didn't take away from -- if
I heard a real deep blues song,
I don't care how much ragtime
I listen to, that
song's going to get me.
It's going to get somebody
else too, if they get
a chance to hear it.
KEB' MO': It's a
beautiful -- the beauty
in it is just so deep.
When I heard the old Muddy
Waters stuff, but, wait a
minute, now, that's what it is.
I could feel the slave
ship coming over the ocean.
TAJ MAHAL: Yes.
KEB' MO': I could feel the
Jim Crow, the cotton-picking.
I could feel the sense of
pride welling up in a man out
of his own circumstances, that
he had to rise up out of a
challenging circumstance of
Jim Crow and slavery and stuff.
I hear all of that.
And that resonates universally.
JEFFREY BROWN: But what you
two have managed to do is make
a life of this, right, without
worrying about
the commercialism?
KEB' MO': Yes, commercialism.
There's something working in
life and in the universe in the
bigger picture that has nothing
to do with commerce and money.
And, for me, I found that after
20 years going after money, that
the faster I ran after money,
the faster the money ran.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: Right.
That sounds like a blues song.
TAJ MAHAL: Yes, yes, the
faster I run after the money...
(CROSSTALK)
KEB' MO': And so I finally
just got out of breath and
stopped -- stopped running.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: And, of
course, neither of them
has stopped playing.
Together, the sound
they're creating is both
upbeat and uplifting.
TAJ MAHAL: Did we know
what it was going to
sound like at this point?
No.
But we knew that it was
going to be something good.
Yes, we knew it was going
to be something good.
I mean, it could have
gone the other way too.
I could have said,
Moore, get out of here.
(LAUGHTER)
KEB' MO': That's what
I thought might happen.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: As always,
there's the question of how long
the blues will live on and who
will take up the mantle.
Taj Mahal and Keb' Mo' are
supremely confident the music
will take care of itself.
KEB' MO': Taking on the blues
is a big responsibility.
So I understand why
people would be concerned.
But the music and riches
is about happiness.
The blues will be fine.
TAJ MAHAL: Disciples?
We have got plenty of them.
(LAUGHTER)
JEFFREY BROWN: Taj Mahal and
Keb' Mo', TajMo, are touring the
country throughout the summer
and into the fall.
For the "PBS NewsHour,"
I'm Jeffrey Brown in
Boulder, Colorado.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you -- yes,
you -- can watch Taj Mahal
and Keb' Mo' perform "Diving
Duck Blues" on our Web
site at PBS.org/NewsHour.
Now to a "NewsHour" Shares,
something that caught our eye
that might be of interest to
you, too.
Just five years ago, Nura Afia
was a young mother in Denver
who enjoyed watching YouTube
videos while taking
care of her daughter.
It turns out it was
time well spent.
She began producing her own
videos on how to apply makeup.
And now she's a sensation,
becoming the first Muslim
brand ambassador for CoverGirl.
Mary MacCarthy from
Colorado Politics brings
us her story from Denver.
NURA AFIA, Model: CoverGirl
was the big break for me that
I never thought I would get.
That was a national beauty
campaign that I never thought
I would see anyone that looks
like me featured in or
anyone that dresses like me.
MARY MACCARTHY, Colorado
Politics: From this humble home
studio, with her daughter's toys
at her feet, Nura Afia has built
an international following.
With 340,000 followers
on Instagram and over
200,000 subscribers to
her YouTube channel,
the 25-year-old makes a very
good living with these tutorials
on the art of applying makeup,
the benefits of skin care, and
how to wear the Muslim hijab.
NURA AFIA: I line the
edge up to my scarf.
I posted I was in the
"Glamour" magazine today.
And someone said,
"Congratulations, paving the way
for Muslim women everywhere."
MARY MACCARTHY: It was after
Afia built up her own following
online that makeup brands
started reaching out to her.
Even though her career has
taken off, Afia admits it's a
complicated time to be a visible
Muslim in the U.S.
The atmosphere caused by the
election has made her more
cautious, while, at the same
time, some in her community
have been reaching out.
NURA AFIA: More people, I
feel like, go out of their
way to smile and are nicer.
So, I feel like that those few
people that are very angry or,
you know, scared of Muslims,
they are still few
and far between.
MARY MACCARTHY: The
wider fashion world
has begun embracing the
hijab, with retail giant
H&M featuring a veiled
model, and Nike recently
launching a hijab sports line.
NURA AFIA: Hijab isn't
just how you dress.
It's supposed to be how you act.
If someone that has never met
a Muslim and they meet me, and
that's their first experience,
I'm hoping that it's the best
experience, and that wearing
the hijab reminds me that
it needs to be the best
experience for everyone
that comes across me.
MARY MACCARTHY: Afia hopes the
greater exposure of Islam in the
fashion world will help reduce
negative stereotypes
of Muslim Americans.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Mary MacCarthy in Denver.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you could
even ask what took us so long.
On the "NewsHour" online right
now, we are keeping track
of how states are responding
to a Trump administration
request for voting data.
You can find the latest
updates at our Web site.
That's PBS.org/NewsHour.
On the "NewsHour" all
next week, correspondent
Nick Schifrin brings us
an in-depth look inside
Vladimir Putin's Russia.
NARRATOR: In Russia today,
resurgent nationalism.
MAN: And authoritarianism
is organic.
It's not artificial.
NARRATOR: Built by
and around one man.
NICK SCHIFRIN: Russians told
pollsters that suddenly they
felt like a super power again.
NARRATOR: But for
Putin's opponents:
WOMAN: People who have tried
to leave the Putin family
voluntarily have not fared very
well.
NARRATOR: A rare look inside
Putin's Russia all next
week on the "PBS NewsHour."
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that is
the "NewsHour" for tonight.
On Thursday, we are on the
ground in Europe, as President
Trump speaks in Poland.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Join us online and again
right here tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," thank you,
and we will see you soon.